# Data

## Note on citations

The [`multiplier/`](multiplier/) folder contains the same data generated by the [MultiPLIER project](https://github.com/greenelab/multi-plier) but separated by model matrices so they can be more easily downloaded.
Please, if you use any of these MultiPLIER files, cite the corresponding paper [here](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cels.2019.04.003).
All the files were downloaded from [this figshare archive](https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.5716033.v4), and later processed by the notebooks in [this folder](https://github.com/greenelab/phenoplier/tree/master/nbs/01_preprocessing).

Similarly, we used PhenomeXcan results (`input/phenomexcan` folder).
Please, if you use any of those PhenomeXcan files, cite the corresponding paper [here](https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aba2083).

## Data description

* `input/`: contains data downloaded from other projects (PhenomeXcan and MultiPLIER), usually with minor changes (such as filtering genes that contain NaN, etc) or no changes at all.
Data is provided in binary and text formats.
We always used binary formats, and text formats are provided for convenience (although always imply some loss of information since decimal places are reduced).
The files are:
  * `input/phenomexcan/smultixcan-mashr-zscores.*`: this is matrix **M** shown in Figure 1 in the manuscript (genes *x* traits).
These are the original PhenomeXcan S-MultiXcan results but converted from p-values to z-scores.
See Methods in manuscript for more details.
  * `input/phenomexcan/smultixcan-efo_partial-mashr-zscores.*`: this is a modified version of matrix **M** (previous file) where traits were mapped to EFO, combined and standardized (removing very similar traits and adjusting for highly polygenic ones), and it was used for the clustering of traits.
See Methods in manuscript for more details, and associated jupyter notebooks in `nbs/01_preprocessing/`.
  * `input/multiplier/multiplier_model_z.*`: Matrix **Z** from MultiPLIER model files (genes *x* latent variables).
  * `input/multiplier/multiplier_model_b.*`: Matrix **B** from MultiPLIER model files (latent variables *x* samples/conditions).
In addition, this folder has the following two more end-user-friendly Excel files for a quick analysis (which were generated by [this notebook](https://github.com/greenelab/phenoplier/blob/master/nbs/99_manuscript/lvs/05-export_lv_gene_dataframe.ipynb)):
  * `input/multiplier/multiplier_model_summary.*`: contains information about pathways associated with each LV.
A more end-user-friendly version of this file can be found in `input/multiplier/lv-pathways.xlsx` where data is sorted by LV identifier and then by FDR.
  * `input/multiplier/lv-gene_weights.xlsx`: it contains one sheet per LV (987 in total) with the list of genes that belong to each one sorted by their weights.
This file is intended for a more end-user-friendly way to perform a quick analysis.
If you want to access this data in a programatic way, you should check out the files `multiplier_model_z.*` instead.
  * `input/multiplier/*`: for the rest of the files, you can check out the MultiPLIER paper to get an idea of the information they provide. 
  * `input/lincs-data.pkl`: LINCS L1000 data downloaded from [here](https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.3085426.v1) (specifically, file `consensi-drugbank-tsv.bz2`), where gene Entrez IDs were mapped to Ensembl ID.

* `projections/`: contains data projected into the MultiPLIER latent space, such as gene-trait associations (S-MultiXcan or S-PrediXcan) and drug-induced transcriptional profiles (LINCS L1000).
These projections are different versions of matrix **M** hat in the manuscript.
  * `projection-smultixcan-mashr-zscores.*`: projection of file `input/phenomexcan/smultixcan-mashr-zscores.*`.
  * `projection-phenomexcan-smultixcan_zscores-efo.*`: projection of file `input/phenomexcan/smultixcan-efo_partial-mashr-zscores.*`.
  * `projection-lincs.*`: projection of file `input/lincs-data.pkl`.

* `data_transformations/`: contains different transformations of the S-MultiXcan results (in folder `projections/`) projected into the latent space.

* `gls/`: LV-trait association results (trats from PhenomeXcan) using a generalized least squares approach.
See manuscript for more details.

* `drug_disease_prediction/`: contains files for the drug-disease prediction.
  * `gold_standard_set/`: prediction files for using the gold standard set ([PharmacotherapyDB](https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.3103054.v1), `indications.tsv`).
Only traits and drug pairs in this set are included in the predictions under this folder.
  * `phenomexcan/`: prediction files for all traits in PhenomeXcan and all drugs in LINCS L1000 separated by tissue.
In the original manuscript, for each drug-disease pair, we took the maximum score across tissues, but other strategies (like computing the mean or median) could be used.

* `clustering/cluster_lvs/`: contains the set of LVs that distinguish traits in each cluster (separated by partitions) from the rest.
This was obtained by the decision tree model.

* `crispr/analyses/`: contains the fgsea analysis on our lipids-altering gene-sets found by a CRISPR screen.
